# Introduction
National Basketball Association (NBA) is a professional North-American basketball league composed of 30 teams (also called franchises): 29 in the United States and 1 in Canada. It is widely regarded as the best basketball league in the world generating annual revenue matched only by the NFL (National Football League), MLB (Major League Baseball) and English Premier League. With only 15 spots on each of the league’s 30 rosters, it comes as no surprise that having NBA experience on one’s resume is considered to be an accomplishment as prestigious as it gets for any aspiring basketball player.

By far the most popular way of getting into the league is the draft: it is an annual event taking place in New York during the offseason, in which all the franchises have two picks at their disposal (unless they traded them away or traded for more) to select the best player available (according to the team’s scouts’ judgement) from the pool of players that enrolled for the draft. The order of teams making the consequent selections is determined by their performance over the previous season in a way favoring weaker franchises: the one with the most wins selects last. Moreover, 14 teams that did not make the playoffs participate in a draft lottery, where the first three franchises to make their selections in the upcoming draft are drawn with the odds being inversely proportional to the number of wins achieved the previous season. As a result, it is possible (and often the case) that it is not the worst team that selects first, but one with more wins (and lower odds) that won the lottery nevertheless. However, it is not possible for the worst franchise to fall below the fourth pick (only top three picks are drawn, the order of the rest is determined by the number of wins). Over two rounds, the total of 60 players is selected each year (although not all of them are later proposed a contract).

The vast majority of players to ever play in the NBA have entered the league through the draft. It is arguably the best way for young prospective players straight out of college (or in some cases in the past, even high school) to be noticed. For example, LeBron James has been selected by the Cleveland Cavaliers with the 1st pick of the 2003 NBA draft, Kobe Bryant was picked by the Charlotte Hornets (and traded to the Lakers) with number 13 in 1996, and Michael Jordan went to the Chicago Bulls with number 3 in 1984. Although teams try to select the best player available (or the one that best meets their roster needs), it is often the case that good players are overlooked by many franchises (e.g. Nikola Jokić, league’s MVP in 2021 was picked with number 41 in 2014), while those chosen early in the draft never develop into players they were supposed to become.

Not all the players trying to join the league that way follow the same career path before entering the draft, however, the majority of them, especially those from North America, have at least one year of prior college experience playing in the NCAA (National Collegiate Athletic Association). Although in the past it was possible to enter the draft straight out of high school, the rules now state that high school graduates only gain eligibility for draft selection one year after their graduation and not before they turn 19. As a result, many players decide to spend that time playing college basketball before enrolling for the draft. Consequently, a significant proportion of players entering the draft have prior college experience, which makes it easier to compare them between each other, since they have all played in a somewhat standardized environment.

Having observed players joining the league over the last decade, it seems like college performance, although definitely plays a role in the process, is not the best predictor of their draft position, and it certainly is not the only one. Many different factors, including age, athleticism, basketball IQ and other intangible assets that might not be reflected in performance (expressed with simple player stats) at the early stages of a player’s career (not to mention factors on the selecting team’s side, like their current roster needs) may affect the decision-making of the NBA franchises’ scouts and general managers when using their draft picks. Nevertheless, it would be interesting to see how well can the  easily accessible data concerning college players’ performance alone predict their future draft selection.

The aim of this project is to gather relevant data and build a predictive model using machine learning techniques. More specifically, the objective is to predict which of the four categories, that the draft selection can be divided into, a given player belongs to, with the categories being: lottery (picks 1-14), first round (picks 15-30), second round (picks 31-60), and undrafted. The data used to train the model will be scraped off the www.sports-reference.com/cbb/ webpage and contain information concerning players’ final season in college before enrolling for the draft or graduating. The data will  include player details (e.g. position, height, weight, school, school year), player statistics (e.g. games played, points per game, 3-point attempts per game, player efficiency rating, true shooting percentage, etc.), team statistics (win percentage, offensive rating, ranking, etc.), and the target variable (draft category).

# Methods, results, and conclusion
See notebooks: get_data.ipynb for data collection, train.ipynb for data exploration, model training, results and conclusions.
